# Blog #1

## Date: 6/25/2020

### My Initial Thought Process

I want to start by saying that I am making this to document my thought process throughout the making of this project in the hopes of becoming proficient at articulating my thought process to others as well as improving my own thought process as I code. I am writing this initial post as I am about half way done with the project. I will detail my initial thoughts on building the project here and some of my initial choices made.

#### Purpose:

My initial purpose of this project was to learn the basics of Vue.js and to make a personal Pomodoro Web App to help me better manage my time on tasks that I have difficulty focusing on. This project has now transformed into a way for me to assess my ability to make well written code, as well as to articulate my personal thought process as I code. I will literally be writing down my thought process for everything I do moving forward from about midway through the project. Below will document the initial decisions I made for the project as well as a few insights on my thought process before I really began to document my thoughts.

#### Initial Plan/Minimum Viable Product:

I knew that I wanted to create a pomodoro app that would count down from a given time, and then allow for a certain amount break. I wanted the initial plan to be very simple because I planned for this project to be an introduction to Vue, and a way to make a simple pomodoro timer for myself. I planned that the time amount would be 25 minutes and the break amount would be 5 minutes. I initially decided that I didn’t want there to be an option to change these values because I wanted to help my self focus on a scheduled amount of time, rather than fiddling with the amount of time that best worked for me. So yes, the initial part of this project was very much tailored to how I wanted to use the timer as a practical tool for myself. I also decided that I wanted different colors to indicate whether I was in work mode, break mode, or if the timer had stopped. I figured that I would use this web app as a webpage set aside on my second screen, so the change in color off to the corner of my eye would help me realize that the timer was finished. This way, I would not continually check if the timer was up, but could be notified by the change of color. With this initial plan, I set out to create the project.

#### Initial Setup:

I initially set this project up with the Vue GUI to give myself experience using UI tools. I typically setup most of my projects using the command line with npm or other tools needed depending on the project. I thought it would be interesting to use the Vue GUI to set up and run my project so that I can see all the extra details the Vue GUI provides about my project. Other than the default Vue project configuration, I did not add any new project dependencies. I deleted the initial project assets and files that I would not need and setup a new file in my components folder called Counter.vue. This file will basically be the majority of the project going forward as the web page itself does not consist of very many individual components, and a little bit way into my work on the project I decided to make a dynamic style choice based on the different states of my timer.

#### Initial Notes:

Upon deciding to use Vue for this project, I decided to use Vue’s single file components to organize my work. This allows me to use a minimal number of files, but admittedly has made my Counter.vue file quite bloated with code. However, below I will detail the initial choices I made regarding the HTML, CSS, and JavaScript for each respective Vue file. I only have two Vue files initially for this project, and one of which has the majority of the functionality so it won’t be too difficult to follow along.

#### App.vue:

The App.vue file is primarily for displaying the Counter component. This file is very light on overall code and is a very basic setup. The HTML basically just has the Counter component inside a div and that is about it. The styling just gets rid of overall page margin and padding and sets box-sizing to border-box. I also made the main app div a display of flex, so that the main content of the Counter component will be centered using justify-content, and align-items to center. The JavaScript is also very basic as it imports the Counter component and adds it to the exported components list.

#### Counter.vue:

Knowing that this would be the main file, I initially planned for this to basically hold everything the user will see on the page. I knew that I wanted there to be a title for the project, the timer itself, and some buttons to start the timer or reset the timer (no pause as I want to commit to working for the given amount of time that I set for myself). However, I first decided to focus on the basic functionality of the timer, as I figured that was the most difficult part of the project, and I really hadn’t tried to make a count down timer before. So, my initial HTML was just the overall div with the class “coutner-container”, an h1 with the class “header”, and a div with the class “timer” for the actual timer. I initially didn’t have any styles added other than the centering provided with the styles from App.vue. For the JavaScript, the main variables (in the case for Vue, this would be my data values) I had displayMinutes = 0, and displaySeconds = 0. I fiddled with different ways to create the timer function, (unfortunately I hadn’t decided to track my thought process at this time so I can’t say all the different ways I tried, but I do remember that I initially tried using the Date function and subtracting a value from that with the timer length, but it was too convoluted), but I ended up using a simple interval function that subtracted 1 every second (or 1000ms) from a local variable called timeLeft which I calculated using a computed value function I created. This timeInSeconds computed value function basically took a prop passed to Counter called time that would represent the minutes the timer should last. The timeInSeconds then just takes that value and converts it to seconds by multiplying by 60 (I know, didn’t see that coming). I also created another method called displayTime which takes in a time t(given in seconds) and converts that time for the minutes and seconds variables and then sets the data values of displayMinuties and displaySeconds respectively. I use this function every time I need to display the time. I also initially had the mounted function calling timer directly, but later change that when I add buttons which I will detail in another post. Finally, after figuring out the timer, I began to add basic styling. For the counter-container class, I had a display of flex basically to just center everything. Then I just changed some basic font sizes as well as importing a font from google fonts to make the timer look a bit more interesting. That is basically it for the initial style.

#### Conclusion:

If you somehow read this entire thing, then thank you! I don’t think this initial post has much merit as I can’t walk through every thought I had while coding, and I do think it is a bit jumbled, but my plan is to make the future entries of this as through and detailed as possible. I think that some content might be boring to read, but I hope to separate ideas I discuss it an organized way, so that if you are interested in a specific functionality I implemented, you can see how I thought through and implemented that. Again, this is primarily just for me to read and write as I have found that doing this helps me understand my thought process and basically make tweaks to how I understand and write code, and I figured a simple project like this would be a great way to do this. This is also a great way for me to improve my writing and documenting of technical details, and my hopes with this writing is that I can begin to make written (and possibly video) tutorials helping beginners understand what it takes to think like a programmer and web developer.
